Revise the summary and motivation, add high level flow. (#527)
near/NEPs: neps/nep-0509.md

## Summary

The NEP proposes an solution to achieve phase 2 of sharding (where none of the validators needs to track all shards), with stateless validation, instead of the traditionally proposed approach of fraud proof and state rollback.

The fundamental idea is that validators do not need to have state locally to validate chunks. 
* Under stateless validation, the responsibility of a chunk producer extends to packaging transactions and receipts and annotating them with state witnesses. This extended role will be called "chunk proposers".
* The state witness of a chunk is defined to be a subset of the trie state, alongside its proof of inclusion in the trie, that is needed to execute a chunk. A state witness allows anyone to execute the chunk without having the state of its shard locally. 

> * Then, at each block height, validators will be randomly assigned to a shard, to validate the state witness for that shard. Once a validator receives a chunk along with its state witness, it verifies the state transition of the chunk, signs a chunk endorsement and sends it to the block producer. This is similar to, but separate from, block approvals and consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Then, at each block height, validators will be randomly assigned to a shard, to validate the state witness for that shard. Once a validator receives both a chunk and its state witness, it verifies the state transition of the chunk, signs a chunk endorsement and sends it to the block producer. This is similar to, but separate from, block approvals and consensus.
```
Technically this is the case currently

Reviewer 2: > at each block height, validators will be randomly assigned to a shard

Is this true? I understand this is possible, but is this what we want to do? Wonder if it's better to leave the option open (e.g. mentioning possibility of assigning validators at every N height)

Author: The NEP is titled Stateless Validation Stage 0, and we don't currently have a plan to do every N (not clear there's a real benefit yet), so I think we may as well just be concrete about what exactly we're doing?

> * The block producer waits for sufficient chunk endorsements before including a chunk into the block it produces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The block producer waits for sufficient chunk endorsements before including a chunk into the block it produces and doesn't include a chunk if it is not endorsed enough.
```
nit

Reviewer 2: Should we mention what 'sufficient' really means? 2/3?

Author: Yeah that's in the specification section. I wanted to keep the summary section high-level.

As a result, the team sought alternative approaches and concluded that stateless validation is the most realistic and promising one; the stateless validation approach does not assume the existence of a fishermen, does not rely on challenges, and never rolls back state. Instead, it relies on the assumption that a shard is secure if every single chunk in that shard is validated by a randomly sampled subset of all validators, to always produce valid chunks in the first place.

## Specification

### Assumptions
* In memory trie is enabled - [REF](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_X2z6CZbIsL68PiFvyrasjRdvKA_uucyIaDURziiH2U/edit?usp=sharing)
* State sync is enabled (so that nodes can track different shards across epochs)
* Merkle Patricia Trie continues to be the state trie implementation
* TBD

### High level requirements
* No validator needs to track all shards.
* Security of protocol must not degrade.

>   * Validator assignment for both chunk validation and block validation should not create any security vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: I think the old point "Moreover, majority of undercharging issues should be mitigated." deserves a point here. Because it is not tracking all shards what allows in-memory trie to be used

Reviewer 2: Any reason we are removing the following statement?

> Only chunk producers need to maintain state locally.

Author: These are mostly technicalities :)

I removed the undercharging point because it's not a "high level requirement". It's more of a good-to-have side effect. It's not a requirement for stateless validation to solve "a majority of undercharging issues" (which isn't even well defined).

For "only chunk producers need to maintain state locally", I also don't think this is a requirement. Even if everybody is required to track some state (and it's not all the state because there is already a point saying no validators needs to track all shards), stateless validation is still successful. If we're talking about the desire that chunk validators who don't also act as chunk producers do not need to track any shard at all, I think the motivation there is that they don't need to have beefy machines to track any state, but that is also covered by the point "Any additional load on network and compute should not negatively affect existing functionalities of *any* node in the blockchain", and that the cost of these should be acceptable. Also, "only chunk producers need to maintain state locally" seems to be a particular solution rather than a requirement, as we're also changing the definition of chunk producers.

* Separation of consensus and execution, where consensus runs independently from execution, and validators asynchronously perform state transitions after the transactions are proposed on the consensus layer, for the purpose of amortizing the computation and network transfer time.
* More shards - this is covered in the resharding project.
* ZK integration.
* Underlying data structure change (e.g. verkle tree).
* Change to validator rewards.
* TBD

## High level flow

We propose a change to the following parts of the chunk and block production flow:

* When a chunk producer produces a chunk, in addition to collecting transactions and receipts for the chunk, it will also produce a `ChunkStateWitness`.
  * The `ChunkStateWitness` contains whatever data necessary to prove that this chunk's header should indeed be what is being produced:
    * As it is today, all fields of the `ShardChunkHeaderInnerV2`, except `tx_root`, are uniquely determined by the blockchain's history based on where the chunk is located (i.e. its parent block and shard ID).

>     * The `tx_root` is based on the list of transactions proposed, which is at the discretion of the chunk producer. However, these transactions must be valid (i.e. the sender accounts have enough balance and the correct nonce, etc.).

Author: The next point after this says that the tx_root corresponds to a valid set of transactions, so I suppose implicitly that means the validation of ChunkStateWitness would validate every claim that it makes (including the tx_root corresponding to a valid set of transactions).

  * Chunk Validator is a new role described in the "Validator role change" section.
  * The subset of chunk validators assigned to a shard is determined by a random shuffle, once per block. See the "Validator Shuffling" section.
* A chunk validator, upon receiving a `ChunkStateWitness`, validates the state witness and determines if the chunk header is indeed correctly produced. If so, it sends a `ChunkEndorsement` to the current block producer.
  * A `ChunkEndorsement` contains the chunk hash along with a signature proving the endorsement by the chunk validator. It implicitly carries a weight equal to the amount of the chunk validator's stake that is assigned to this shard for this block. (See Validator Shuffling).
* As the existing logic is today, the block producer for this block waits until either all chunks are ready, or a timeout occurs, and then proposes a block containing whatever chunks are ready. Now, the notion of readiness here is expanded to also having more than 2/3 of chunk endorsements by weight.

>   * This means that if a chunk does not receive enough chunk endorsements by the timeout, it will not be included in the block. In other words, the block only contains chunks for which there is already a consensus of validity. This is the key reason why we will no longer need challenges.

Author: Sure.

>   * The 2/3 fraction has the denominator being the total stake assigned to validate this shard, *not* the total stake of all validators.

Author: It's necessary, I was going to cover that in the validator selection algorithm section but that isn't complete. I added a reference to that section here.

The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.]

> ## Validatior Role Change

Reviewer 3: Validator
